The Project Gutenberg EBook of RX, by Alan E. Nourse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: RX

Author: Alan E. Nourse

Release Date: October 3, 2019 [EBook #60412]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RX ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                 R_{X}

                           BY ALAN E. NOURSE

                _The tenth son of a tenth son was very
                sick, but it was written that he would
                never die. Of course, it was up to the
                 Earth doctor to see that he didn't!_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Worlds of If Science Fiction, October 1957.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


They didn't realize they were in trouble until it was too late to stop
it. The call from Morua II came in quite innocently, relayed to the
ship from HQ in Standard GPP Contract code for crash priority, which
meant Top Grade Planetary Emergency, and don't argue about it, fellows,
just get there, fast. Red Doctor Sam Jenkins took one look at the
flashing blinker and slammed the controls into automatic; gyros hummed,
bearings were computed and checked, and the General Practice Patrol
ship _Lancet_ spun in its tracks, so to speak, and began homing on the
call-source like a hound on a fox. The fact that Morua II was a Class
VI planet didn't quite register with anybody, just then.

Ten minutes later the Red Doctor reached for the results of the Initial
Information Survey on Morua II, and let out a howl of alarm. A single
card sat in the slot with a wide black stripe across it.

Jenkins snapped on the intercom. "Wally," he yelped. "Better get up
here fast."

"Trouble?" said the squawk-box, sleepily.

"Oh, brother," said Jenkins. "Somebody's cracked the Contract Code or
something."

A moment later a tall sleepy man in green undershorts appeared at
the control room, rubbing his eyes. "What happened?" he said. "We've
changed course."

"Yeah. Ever hear of Morua II?"

Green Doctor Wally Stone frowned and scratched his whiskered chin.
"Sounds familiar, but I can't quite tune in. Crash call?" His eye
caught the black-striped card. "Class VI planet ... a plague spot! How
can we get a crash-call from _this_?"

"You tell me," said Jenkins.

"Wait a minute. Seems to me there was some sort of nasty business--"

Jenkins nodded heavily. "There sure was. Five successive attempts
to establish a Contract with them, and five times we got thrown out
bodily. The last time an Earth ship landed there half the crew was
summarily shot and the others came home with their ears cut off. Seems
the folks on Morua II didn't want a Contract with Hospital Earth. And
they're still in the jungle, as far as their medicine goes. Witch
doctors and spells." He tossed the Info-card down the chute with a
growl. "So now we have an emergency call from them in a Contract code
they couldn't possibly know."

The surgeon in the green undershorts chewed his lip. "Looks like
somebody in that last crew spilled the beans before they shot him."

"Obviously."

"Well, what are we doing on automatics? We're not _going_ there, are
we?"

"What else? You know the law. Instantaneous response to any
crash-priority call, regardless of circumstances--"

"Law be damned," Stone cried. "File a protest with HQ. Cancel the
course bearings and thumb our noses at them!"

"And spend the next twenty years scrubbing test tubes." Jenkins shook
his head. "Sorry, it took me too long to get aboard one of these tubs.
We don't do that in the General Practice Patrol, remember? I don't know
how Morua II got the code, but they got it, and that's all the farther
we're supposed to think. We answer the call, and beef about it later.
If we still happen to be around later, that is."

       *       *       *       *       *

It had always been that way. Since the first formal Medical Service
Contract had been signed with Deneb III centuries before, Hospital
Earth had laboriously built its reputation on that single foundation
stone: immediate medical assistance, without question or hesitation,
whenever and wherever it was required, on any planet bound by Contract.
That was the law, for Hospital Earth could not afford to jeopardize a
Contract.

In the early days of galactic exploration, of course, Medical Services
was only a minor factor in an expanding commercial network that drew
multitudes of planets into social and economic interdependence; but
in any growing civilization division of labor inevitably occurs.
Other planets outstripped Earth in technology, in communications, in
transport, and in production techniques--but Earth stood unrivaled in
its development of the biological sciences. Wherever an Earth ship
landed, the crew was soon rendering Medical Services of one sort or
another, whether they had planned it that way or not. On Deneb III
the Medical Service Contract was formalized, and Hospital Earth came
into being. Into all known corners of the galaxy ships of the General
Practice Patrol were dispatched--"Galactic Pill Peddlers" forging a
chain of Contracts from Aldebaran to Zarn, accepting calls, diagnosing
ills, arranging for proper disposition of whatever medical problems
they came across. Serious problems were shuttled back to Hospital Earth
without delay; more frequently the GPP crews--doctors of the Red and
Green services, representing the ancient Earthly arts of medicine and
surgery--were able to handle the problems on the spot and by themselves.

It was a rugged service for a single planet to provide, and it was
costly. Many planets studied the terms of Contract and declined,
pleasantly but firmly--and were assured nevertheless that GPP ships
would answer an emergency call if one was received. There would be a
fee, of course, but the call would be answered. And then there were
other planets--places such as Morua II....

The _Lancet_ homed on the dismal grey planet with an escort of eight
ugly fighter ships which had swarmed up like hornets to greet her. They
triangled her in, grappled her, and dropped her with a bone-jarring
crash into a landing slot on the edge of the city. As Sam Jenkins and
Wally Stone picked themselves off the bulkheads, trying to rearrange
the scarlet and green uniforms of their respective services, the main
entrance lock burst open with a squeal of tortured metal. At least a
dozen Moruans poured into the control room--huge bearlike creatures
with heavy grey fur ruffing out around their faces like thick hairy
dog collars. The one in command strode forward arrogantly, one huge
paw leveling a placer-gun with a distinct air of business about it.
"Well, you took long enough!" he roared, baring a set of yellow fangs
that sent shivers up Jenkins' spine. "Fourteen hours! Do you call that
speed?"

Jenkins twisted down the volume on his Translator with a grimace.
"You're lucky we came at all," he said peevishly. "Where's your
Contract? Where did you get the Code?"

"Bother the Contract," the Moruan snarled. "You're supposed to be
physicians, eh?" He eyed them up and down as though he disapproved of
everything that he saw. "You make sick people well?"

"That's the general idea."

"All right." He poked a hairy finger at a shuttle car perched outside.
"In there."

They were herded into the car with three guards in front and three
behind. A tunnel gulped them into darkness as the car careened madly
into the city. For an endless period they pitched and churned through
blackness--then suddenly emerged into a high, gilded hall with pale
sunlight filtering down. From the number of decorated guards, and
the scraping and groveling that went on as they were hurried through
embattled corridors, it seemed likely they were nearing the seat of
government. Finally a pair of steel doors opened to admit them to
a long, arched hallway. Their leader, who was called Aguar by his
flunkies, halted them with a snarl and walked across to the tall figure
guarding the far door. The guard did not seem pleased; he wore a long
purple cap with a gold ball on the end which twitched wildly as their
whispered conference devolved into growling and snarling. Finally
Aguar motioned them to follow, and they entered the far chamber, with
Purple-Hat glaring at them malignantly as they passed.

Aguar halted them at the door-way. "His Eminence will see you," he
growled.

"Who is His Eminence?" Jenkins asked.

"The Lord High Emperor of All Morua and Creator of the Galaxies," Aguar
rumbled. "He is the Tenth Son of a Tenth Son, and it is written that he
can never die. When you enter, bow," he added.

The Tenth Son of a Tenth Son couldn't have cared less whether they
bowed or not. The room was dark and rank with the smell of sickness. On
a pallet in the center lay a huge Moruan, panting and groaning. He was
wrapped like a mummy in bedclothes of scarlet interwoven with gold; on
either side of the bed braziers flickered with sickly greenish light.

His Eminence looked up at them from bloodshot eyes and greeted them
with a groan of anguish that seemed to roll up from the soles of his
feet. "Go away," he moaned, closing his eyes again and rolling over
with his back toward them.

The Red Doctor blinked at his companion, then turned to Aguar. "What
illness is this?" he whispered.

"He is afflicted with a Pox, as any fool can see. All others it
kills--but His Eminence is the Tenth Son of a Tenth Son, and it is
written--"

"Yes, yes, I know. He can never die." Sam gave Wally a sour look. "What
happens, though, if he just up and does?"

Aguar's paw came down with a clatter on the hilt of his sword. "_He
does not die._ We have you here now. You are doctors, you say. Cure
him."

They walked to the bedside and lifted back the covers. Jenkins took a
limp paw in his hand. He finally found a palpable pulse just below the
second elbow joint. It was fast and thready. The creature's skin bagged
loosely from his arm.

"Looks like His Eminence can't read," Wally muttered. "He's going fast,
Doc."

Jenkins nodded grimly. "What does it look like to you?"

"How should I know? I've never seen a healthy Moruan before, to say
nothing of a sick one. It looks like a pox all right."

"Probably a viremia of some sort." Jenkins went over the great groaning
hulk with inquiring fingers.

"If it's a viremia, we're cooked," Stone whispered. "None of the drugs
cross over--and we won't have time to culture the stuff and grow any
new ones--"

Jenkins turned to Aguar. "How long has this gone on?"

"For days," the Moruan growled. "He can't speak. He grows hot and
cannot eat. He moans until the Palace trembles."

"What about your own doctors?"

Aguar spat angrily on the floor. "They are jealous as cats until
trouble comes. Then they hide in the caves like chickens. See the
green flames? Death flames. They leave him here to die. But now that
is all over. We have heard about you wizards from Hospital Earth. You
cure all, the stories say. You are very wise, they say. You balance
the humors and drive forth the spirits of the Pox like devils." He
gave them a terrible grin and tightened his hand on the gold-encrusted
sword. "Now we see."

"We can't promise," Jenkins began. "Sometimes we're called too
late--but perhaps not in this case," he added hastily when he saw the
Moruan's face. "Tenth Son and all that. But you'll have to give us
freedom to work."

"What kind of freedom?"

"We'll need supplies and information from our ship. We'll have to
consult your physicians. We'll need healthy Moruans to examine--"

"But you will cure him," Aguar said.

Jenkins took a deep breath and gripped his red tunic around his throat
tightly. "Sure, sure," he said weakly. "You just watch us."

       *       *       *       *       *

"But what do you think we're going to do?" the surgeon wailed, back
in the control room of the _Lancet_. "Sam, we can't _touch_ him. If
he didn't die naturally we'd kill him for sure! We can't go near him
without a Bio-survey--look what happened on Baron when they tried it!
Half the planetary population wiped out before they realized that the
antibiotic was more deadly to the race than the virus was...."

"Might not be such a bad idea for Morua," the Red Doctor muttered
grimly. "Well, what did you expect me to do--politely refuse? And
have our throats slit right on the spot?" He grabbed a pad and began
scribbling. "We've got to do _something_ just to keep alive for a
while."

"Yeah," said Wally. "What, for instance?"

"Well, we've got a little to go on just from looking at them. They're
oxygen-breathers, which means they manage internal combustion of
carbohydrates, somehow. From the grey skin color I'd guess at a cuprous
or stannous heme-protein carrying system. They're carnivores, but god
knows what their protein metabolism is like--Let's get going on some of
these specimens Aguar has rounded up for us."

They dug in frantically. Under normal conditions a GPP ship would
send in a full crew of technicians to a newly-Contracted planet to
make the initial Bio-survey of the indigenous races. Bio-chemists,
physiologists, anatomists, microbiologists, radiologists--survey
workers from every Service would examine and study the new clients,
take them apart cell by cell to see what made them tick.

Certain basic principles were always the same, a fact which accelerated
the program considerably. Humanoid or not, all forms of life had basic
qualities in common. Biochemical reactions were biochemical reactions,
whether they happened to occur in a wing-creature of Wolf IV or a
doctor from Sol III. Anatomy was a broad determinant: a jelly-blob from
Deneb I with its fine skein of pulsating nerve fibrils was still just
a jelly-blob, and would never rise above the level of amoeboid yes-no
response because of its utter lack of organization. But a creature
with an organized central nervous system and a functional division of
work among organ systems could be categorized, tested, studied, and
compared, and the information used in combating native disease. Given
no major setbacks, and full cooperation of the natives, the job only
took about six months to do--

For the crew of the _Lancet_ six hours was seven hours too long. They
herded cringing Moruan "volunteers" into the little ship's lab. Jenkins
handled external examinations and blood and tissue chemistries; Stone
ran the X-ray and pan-endoscopic examinations. After four grueling
hours the Red Doctor groaned and scowled at the growing pile of data.
"Okay. It seems that they're vaguely humanoid. And that's about all we
can say for sure. I think we're wasting time. What say we tackle the
Wizards for a while?"

Aguar's guards urged the tall Moruan with the purple cap into the
control room at gunpoint, along with a couple of minor medical
potentates. Purple-hat's name was Kiz, and it seemed that he wasn't
having any that day.

"Look," said Jenkins intensely. "You've seen this illness before. We
haven't. So you can at least get us started. What kind of course does
it run?"

Silence.

"All right then, what causes it? Do you know? Bacteria? Virus?
Degeneration?"

Silence.

Jenkins' face was pale. "Look, boys--your Boss out there is going to
cool before long if something doesn't happen fast--" His eyes narrowed
on Kiz. "Of course, that might be right up your alley--how about that?
His Eminence bows out, somebody has to bow in, right? Maybe you, huh?"

Kiz began sputtering indignantly; the Red Doctor cut him off. "It
adds up," he said heatedly. "You've got the power, you've got your
magic and all. Maybe you were the boys that turned thumbs down so
violently on the idea of a Hospital Earth Contract, eh? Couldn't risk
having outsiders cutting in on your trade." Jenkins rubbed his chin
thoughtfully. "But somehow it seems to me you'd have a whale of a lot
more power if you learned how to control this Pox."

Kiz stopped sputtering quite abruptly. He blinked at his confederates
for a long moment. Then: "You're an idiot. It can't be done."

"Suppose it could."

"The Spirit of the Pox is too strong. Our most powerful spells make him
laugh. He eats our powders and drinks our potions. Even the Iron Circle
won't drive him out."

"Won't it, now! Well, we have iron _needles_ and potions that eat the
bottoms out of their jars. Suppose _they_ drive him out?"

The Moruan was visibly shaken. He held a whispered conference with his
henchmen. "You'll _show_ us these things?" he asked suspiciously.

"I'll make a bargain," said Jenkins. "You give us a Contract, we give
you the power--fair enough?"

More whispers. Wally Stone tugged at Sam's sleeve. "What do you think
you're doing?" he choked. "These boys will cut your throat quicker than
Aguar will--"

"Maybe not," said Sam. "Look, I've got an idea--risky, but it might
work if you'll play along. We can't lose much."

The whispers stopped and Kiz nodded to the Red Doctor. "All right, we
bargain," he said. "_After_ you show us."

"Now or never." Jenkins threw open the door and nodded to the guards.
"I'll be in the sickroom in a very short while. If you're with me, I'll
see you there. If not--" He fingered his throat suggestively.

As soon as they had gone Jenkins dived into the storeroom and began
throwing flasks and bottles into a black bag. Wally Stone watched him
in bewilderment. "You're going to kill him," he moaned. "Prayers,
promises, pills and post-mortems. That's the Medical service for you."

Sam grinned. "Maybe you should operate on him. _That_ would open their
eyes all right."

"No thanks, not me. This is a medical case and it's all yours. What do
you want me to do?"

"Stay here and try your damnedest to get through to HQ," said Sam
grimly. "Tell them to send an armada, because we're liable to need one
in the next few hours--"

       *       *       *       *       *

If the Tenth Son of a Tenth Son had looked bad before, three hours had
witnessed no improvement. The potentate's skin had turned from grey
to a pasty green as he lay panting on the bed. He seemed to have lost
strength enough even to groan, and his eyes were glazed.

Outside the royal chambers Jenkins found a group of green-clad
mourners, wailing like banshees and tearing out their fur in great grey
chunks. They stood about a flaming brazier; as Jenkins entered the
sickroom the wails rose ten decibels and took on a howling-dog quality.

Aguar met him at the door. "He's dying," he roared angrily. "Why don't
you do something? Every hour he sinks more rapidly, and all you do is
poke holes in the healthy ones! And then you send in _this_ bag of
bones again--" He glowered at the tall purple-capped figure bending
over the bed.

Jenkins looked sharply at Kiz, and the wizard nodded his head slowly.
"Try being quiet for a while," Jenkins said to Aguar. "We're going to
cure the Boss here." Solemnly he slipped off his scarlet tunic and cap
and laid them on a bench, then set his black bag carefully on the floor
and threw it open. "First off, get rid of those things." He pointed
to the braziers at the bedside. "They're enough to give anybody a
headache. And tell those people outside to stop the racket. How can
they expect the Spirit of the Pox to come out of His Eminence when
they're raising a din like that?"

Aguar's eyes widened for a moment as he hesitated; then he threw open
the door and screamed a command. The wailing stopped as though a switch
had been thrown. As a couple of cowering guards crept in to remove the
braziers, Red Doctor Jenkins drew the wizard aside.

"Tell me what spells you've already used."

Hurriedly, Kiz began enumerating, ticking off items on hairy fingers.
As he talked Jenkins dug into the black bag and started assembling a
liter flask, tubing and needles.

"First we brewed witches' root for seven hours and poured it over his
belly. When the Pox appeared in spite of this we lit three red candles
at the foot of the bed and beat His Eminence steadily for one hour out
of four, with new rawhide. When His Eminence protested this, we were
certain the Spirit had possessed him, so we beat him one hour out of
two--"

Jenkins winced as the accounting of cabalistic clap-trap continued. His
Eminence, he reflected, must have had the constitution of an ox. He
glanced over at the panting figure on the bed. "But doesn't _anybody_
ever recover from this?"

"Oh, yes--if the Spirit that afflicts them is very small. Those are
the fortunate ones. They grow hot and sick, but they still can eat
and drink--" The wizard broke off to stare at the bottle-and-tube
arrangement Jenkins had prepared. "What's that?"

"I told you about the iron needles, didn't I? Hold this a moment."
Jenkins handed him the liter flask. "Hold it high." He began searching
for a vein on the patient's baggy arm. The Moruan equivalent of blood
flowed back greenishly in the tube for an instant as he placed the
needle; then the flask began to drip slowly.

Aguar let out a horrified scream and raced from the room; in a moment
he was back with a detachment of guards, all armed to the teeth, and
three other Moruan physicians with their retinues of apprentices. Sam
Jenkins held up his hand for silence. He allowed the first intravenous
flask to pour in rapidly; the second he adjusted to a steady
drip-drip-drip.

Next he pulled two large bunsen burners and a gas tank from the bag.
These he set up at the foot of the bed, adjusting the blue flames to
high spear-tips. On the bedside table he set up a third with a flask
above it; into this he poured some water and a few crystals from a dark
bottle. In a moment the fluid in the flask was churning and boiling, an
ominous purple color.

Kiz watched goggle-eyed.

"Now!" said Jenkins, pulling out a long thin rubber tube. "This should
annoy the Spirit of the Pox something fierce." He popped the tube into
the patient's mouth. His Eminence rose up with a gasp, choking and
fighting, but the tube went down. The Red Doctor ground three white
pills into powder, mixed in some water, and poured it down the tube.

Then he stepped back to view the scene, wiping cold perspiration from
his forehead. He motioned to Kiz. "You see what I'm doing, of course?"
he said loudly enough for Aguar and the guards to hear.

"Oh, yes--yes! Indeed, indeed," said Kiz.

"Fine. Now this is most important." Jenkins searched in the bag until
he found a large mortar which he set down on the floor. Squatting
behind it, he began tapping it slowly with the pestle, in perfect
rhythm with the intravenous drip ... and waited.

The room was deathly still except for a heavy snuffling sound from His
Eminence and the plink-plink of the pestle on the mortar. The flask of
purple stuff gurgled quietly. An hour passed, and another. Suddenly
Jenkins motioned to Kiz. "His pulse--quickly!"

Kiz scampered gratefully over to the bedside. "A hundred and eighty,"
he whispered.

Jenkins' face darkened. He peered at the sick man intently. "It's a
bad sign," he said. "The Spirit is furious at the intrusion of an
outsider." He motioned toward the mortar. "Can you do this?"

Without breaking the rhythm he transferred the plinking-job to Kiz.
He changed the dwindling intravenous bottle. "Call me when the bottle
is empty--or if there is any change. Whatever you do, _don't touch
anything_."

With that he tiptoed from the room. Four murderous-looking guards
caught Aguar's eye and followed him out, swords bared. Jenkins sank
down on a bench in the hall and fell asleep in an instant.

       *       *       *       *       *

They woke him once, hours later, to change the intravenous solution,
and he found Kiz still intently pounding on the mortar. Jenkins
administered more of the white powder in water down the tube, and went
back to his bench. He had barely fallen asleep again when they were
rousing him with frightened voices. "Quickly!" Aguar cried. "There's
been a terrible change!"

In the sickroom His Eminence was drenched with sweat, his face
glistening in the light of the bunsen burners. He rolled from side to
side, groaning hoarsely. "_Faster!_" Jenkins shouted to Kiz at the
mortar, and began stripping off the sodden bedclothes. "Blankets,
now--plenty of them."

The plink-plink rose to a frantic staccato as Jenkins checked the
patient's vital signs, wiped more sweat from his furry brow. Quite
suddenly His Eminence opened bleary eyes, stared about him, let out a
monumental groan and buried his head in the blankets. In two minutes
he was snoring softly. His face was cool now, his heart-beat slow and
regular.

Jenkins snatched the mortar from Kiz, and with a wild flourish smashed
it on the stone floor. Then he grabbed the wizard's paw, raising it
high. "You've done well!" he cried to the bewildered physician. "It's
over now--the Spirit has departed. His Eminence will recover."

       *       *       *       *       *

They escorted him in triumphal procession back to the _Lancet_, where
Wally Stone stared in disbelief as Jenkins and Kiz bowed and hugged
each other like long-lost brothers at a sad farewell. "I finally got
through to somebody at HQ," he said as the Red Doctor climbed aboard.
"It'll take them twenty days at least, to get help, considering that
Morua is not a Contract planet and we're not supposed to be here in the
first place, but that's the best they can do...."

"Tell them to forget the armada," said Jenkins, grinning. "And anyway,
they've got things all wrong back at HQ." He brandished a huge roll
of parchment, stricken through with the colors of the seven Medical
Services of Hospital Earth. "Take a look, my boy--the juiciest Medical
Services Contract that's been written in three centuries--" He tossed
the Contract in the dry-storage locker with a sigh. "Old Kiz just
finished his first lesson, and he's still wondering what went on--"

"So am I," said the Green Doctor suspiciously.

"It was simple. We cured His Eminence of the Pox."

"With what? Incantations?"

"Oh, the incantations were for the _doctors_," said Jenkins. "They
expected them, obviously, since that was the only level of medicine
they could understand. And incidentally, the only level that could
possibly get us a Contract. Anyway, I couldn't do very much else, under
the circumstances, except for a little supportive therapy. Without a
Bio-survey we were hamstrung. But whatever the Pox is, it obviously
involves fever, starvation and dehydration. I knew that His Eminence
could assimilate carbohydrates, and I took a long gamble that an
antipyretic wouldn't hurt him too much--"

Wally Stone's jaw sagged. "So you treated him with sugar-water and
aspirin," he said weakly. "And on that you risked our necks."

"Not quite," said the Red Doctor. "You're forgetting that I had
one other prescription to use--the oldest, most trustworthy
healer-of-all-ills known to medicine, just as potent now as it was a
thousand years ago. Without it, Hospital Earth might just as well pack
up her little black bag and go home." He smiled into the mirror as he
adjusted the scarlet band of the Red Service across his shoulders. "We
call it Tincture of Time," he said.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of RX, by Alan E. Nourse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RX ***

***** This file should be named 60412.txt or 60412.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/4/1/60412/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
